Whether you are the administrator
of the Linux system
or a regular user working with the shell,
there would be situations where you have to
locate a file or a directory in the file system.
This can be done in the command line
in a variety of ways.
Let's go back to our directory structure
of continents, countries, and cities.
Say you want to find the files
with the name "City.txt".
The easiest way to do this is
to make use of the locate command.
Run the locate command with the file name
you are searching as the argument.
This should return all paths
matching the pattern.
This command is useful to find files
quickly in the Linux file system.
It will print out all paths
with the keyword in it.
The downside to this command is
that it depends on a database called
"mlocate.db" for querying the file name.
If you have just installed Linux
or if the file you are trying to
locate was created recently,
this command may not yield useful results.
This is because it is possible that
the DB has not been updated yet.
To manually update the DB,
run the command updatedb,
and then run the locate command again.
Please note that the updatedb command
needs to be run as a root user to work.
Another way to do this is to make
use of the find command.
Use the find command followed by the directory
under which you want to search.
To search for a file by name, use the -name option,
followed by the name of the file.
This is just one way to use the find command.
There are plenty of other options
available with the find command,
making it a powerful tool for searching
for files or directories or patterns.
To search within files, the most popular
command in Linux is grep.
Grep is commonly used to print lines
of a file matching a pattern,
but it offers a variety of
other options as well.
For example, consider a file called "sample.txt".
As you can see, this file
has a few lines of data in it.
For the first example, let's search
for the word "second" in the file.
To do this, we will use the grep command
followed by the word "second",
and finally, the file name.
This should print out only the line
matching the search pattern, "second".
The grep command is case sensitive
and will only print the lines
matching the case of the pattern.
To search case insensitive use the -i flag.
Grep -r can be used to search for
a pattern recursively within a directory.
This is especially useful when
you don't know which file
contains the specific pattern
that you are looking for.
In this example, we are trying to print all files
that contain the string "third line"
within the /home/michael/directory.
The result shows the file called "sample.txt",
followed by the complete line,
which includes the search pattern.
So far, we have been trying to list
lines containing a string within a file.
What if we want to do the opposite,
print the lines of a file that
don't match a pattern?
For that, we use the -v option.
This option lists all lines that
do not contain a particular string.
In this case, the fifth line has the word "printed"
and so it's not displayed.
What if you want to match a pattern
that form whole words?
For example, consider an "example.txt" file
that contains two lines.
The first line of the file is "grep examples"
and the second line contains the
sentence "linux exam on 19th".
What would happen if you want to
print the line matching the keyword "exam"
using the command grep exam example.txt?
You will find that this command prints
both lines of the file
and not just the second line.
This is because, in the first line,
the word "examples"
contains a part of the pattern we are
looking for, which is the word "exam".
To search for the whole word called "exam",
use grep -w exam example.txt.
You can also combine
multiple options together.
For example, to reverse the search
and print all lines of the same file
that does not match the whole word "exam",
use the grep -vw exam and the file name.
This will only print the first line of
the file containing the word "examples".
Finally, the -A and -B command flags
can be used to print a number of lines
after and before matching a pattern.
For example, consider a text file
called "premier-league-table.txt".
To see the club that finished one ranking
lower than Arsenal at the first spot,
use grep -A1 Arsenal followed by the file name.
This will print the lines matching the pattern
and one line immediately below.
The pattern, in this case, is Arsenal
Similarly, use the -B option to print the lines
before a matching pattern.
In this example, we are using -B1 with pattern 4.
As a result, the line containing the number 4
and the one before is printed.
Instead of A1 or B1,
you can use any positive integer number
with the -A or -B flag.
It will print that number of lines after
or before the match.
Finally, the -A and -B can be
combined into one single search
to print a number of lines
before and after a match like this.